README.md, before:

# Bloom Compiler

This is an experimental compiler for a new language based on
[Bloom](http://www.bloom-lang.net/).


## Usage

The command line interface to the Bloom compiler is implemented by the
`Compiler` object.

From a source checkout, the easiest way to run the compiler is through `sbt
run`; use

    sbt run --infile <sourcefile> --target [dataflow|rxflow]

to compile `sourcefile` and generate either a GraphViz .DOT file representing
a dataflow graph (for the `dataflow` target) or Javascript code (for the
`rxflow` target).

We don't have a language reference yet, but in the meantime there are some
[example programs](/compiler/src/test/resources/examples/) that give a flavor
of the language.


## Phases

To compile a Bloom program, the compiler executes the following phases:

- Parse source
- Resolve names
- Assign types
- Analyze dependencies
- Stratify collections and rules
- Generate intermediate dataflow graph representation
- Calculate invalidation and rescan sets
- Emit source code to instantiate dataflow on the target runtime


## Implementation Details / Developer Notes

A goal of this implementation is to maintain a clean separation of concerns
between the different compilation and analysis components.  For example, the
stratification logic is implemented in two files, one that contains all of the
dependency analysis code, and another that declaratively describes the
stratification in terms of dependencies.

Several components of the compiler are implemented using
[Kiama](https://code.google.com/p/kiama/).  We use its positional parser
utilities, lazy attribute grammars, and tree-rewriting systems to address ["the
AST typing problem"](http://lambda-the-ultimate.org/node/4170).


## Structure of the Generated Dataflow Code

The runtime-specific dataflow code generators try to isolate the Bloom-specific
code to a few operators that sit at the edges of the dataflow, plus some
orchestration code that sits outside the dataflow.  By not imposing
Bloom-specific requirements on the dataflow operators, this allows us to re-use
existing dataflow systems by  implementing at most one or two new operators.

The RxFlow backend translates a Bloom program to a Javascript object that
encapsulate a dataflow and exposes
[RxJS](http://reactive-extensions.github.io/RxJS/) Observer and Observable
interfaces for integration with external data sources.

To execute a single logical timestep of a Bloom program, an instance of the
RxFlow Javascript runtime performs the following actions:

1. For all tables, check whether they have pending deletions.  Perform those
   deletions and record whether any records were actually deleted from the
   tables.  This second step is necessary because deletions may try to remove
   nonexistent tuples.
3. Determine the set of invalidated elements: for any table that performed
   deletions, look up the set of invalidated elements by indexing into a static
   structure generated by the compiler's invalidation analysis module.
4. For each invalidated dataflow element, perform the appropriate calls to
   clear its cached state.
5. Execute the dataflow until fixed point:
    - To initiate the computation, rescan the invalidated tables, then perform
      any pending insertions that were deferred in the previous timestep.
    - For acyclic dataflows, it's easy to detect termination: when the input
      sources produce all of their outputs, they can emit "end-of-round"
      messages that flow downstream and propagate to the sinks.
    - For cyclic dataflows, we can propagate "idle" messages around the
      dataflow until all tables / scanners have inferred that no tuples are
      buffered or in flight.  A simpler solution is to use a single point of
      coordination to track non-idle communication channels and operators and
      detect termination.

In this architecture, the Table element is somewhat Bloom-specific, but the
other dataflow elements are completely generic; they only need to support
a `clear/reset` method to clear cached state and possibly a `flush` mechanism
to cause buffered records to be sent downstream.


[![wercker status](https://app.wercker.com/status/57637a8bfa9aedbe840380a5621d4df7/m/master "wercker status")](https://app.wercker.com/project/bykey/57637a8bfa9aedbe840380a5621d4df7)

Commit message:

Add sbt-native-packager plugin.

README.md, after:

# Bloom Compiler

This is an experimental compiler for a new language based on
[Bloom](http://www.bloom-lang.net/).


## Usage

The command line interface to the Bloom compiler is implemented by the
`Compiler` object.

During development, the easiest way to run the compiler is through `sbt run`;
use

    sbt run --infile <sourcefile> --target [dataflow|rxflow]

to compile `sourcefile` and generate either a GraphViz .DOT file representing
a dataflow graph (for the `dataflow` target) or Javascript code (for the
`rxflow` target).


To build a binary distribution of the compiler, use the
[sbt-native-packager](https://github.com/sbt/sbt-native-packager) sbt targets;
for example, running `sbt stage` will stage a binary distribution in the
`compiler/target/universal/stage` directory, where you can use

    ./compiler/target/universal/stage/bin/bloom-compiler

to run the compiler.

We don't have a language reference yet, but in the meantime there are some
[example programs](/compiler/src/test/resources/examples/) that give a flavor
of the language.


## Phases

To compile a Bloom program, the compiler executes the following phases:

- Parse source
- Resolve names
- Assign types
- Analyze dependencies
- Stratify collections and rules
- Generate intermediate dataflow graph representation
- Calculate invalidation and rescan sets
- Emit source code to instantiate dataflow on the target runtime


## Implementation Details / Developer Notes

A goal of this implementation is to maintain a clean separation of concerns
between the different compilation and analysis components.  For example, the
stratification logic is implemented in two files, one that contains all of the
dependency analysis code, and another that declaratively describes the
stratification in terms of dependencies.

Several components of the compiler are implemented using
[Kiama](https://code.google.com/p/kiama/).  We use its positional parser
utilities, lazy attribute grammars, and tree-rewriting systems to address ["the
AST typing problem"](http://lambda-the-ultimate.org/node/4170).


## Structure of the Generated Dataflow Code

The runtime-specific dataflow code generators try to isolate the Bloom-specific
code to a few operators that sit at the edges of the dataflow, plus some
orchestration code that sits outside the dataflow.  By not imposing
Bloom-specific requirements on the dataflow operators, this allows us to re-use
existing dataflow systems by  implementing at most one or two new operators.

The RxFlow backend translates a Bloom program to a Javascript object that
encapsulate a dataflow and exposes
[RxJS](http://reactive-extensions.github.io/RxJS/) Observer and Observable
interfaces for integration with external data sources.

To execute a single logical timestep of a Bloom program, an instance of the
RxFlow Javascript runtime performs the following actions:

1. For all tables, check whether they have pending deletions.  Perform those
   deletions and record whether any records were actually deleted from the
   tables.  This second step is necessary because deletions may try to remove
   nonexistent tuples.
3. Determine the set of invalidated elements: for any table that performed
   deletions, look up the set of invalidated elements by indexing into a static
   structure generated by the compiler's invalidation analysis module.
4. For each invalidated dataflow element, perform the appropriate calls to
   clear its cached state.
5. Execute the dataflow until fixed point:
    - To initiate the computation, rescan the invalidated tables, then perform
      any pending insertions that were deferred in the previous timestep.
    - For acyclic dataflows, it's easy to detect termination: when the input
      sources produce all of their outputs, they can emit "end-of-round"
      messages that flow downstream and propagate to the sinks.
    - For cyclic dataflows, we can propagate "idle" messages around the
      dataflow until all tables / scanners have inferred that no tuples are
      buffered or in flight.  A simpler solution is to use a single point of
      coordination to track non-idle communication channels and operators and
      detect termination.

In this architecture, the Table element is somewhat Bloom-specific, but the
other dataflow elements are completely generic; they only need to support
a `clear/reset` method to clear cached state and possibly a `flush` mechanism
to cause buffered records to be sent downstream.


[![wercker status](https://app.wercker.com/status/57637a8bfa9aedbe840380a5621d4df7/m/master "wercker status")](https://app.wercker.com/project/bykey/57637a8bfa9aedbe840380a5621d4df7)
